Let's get a brief look at a few of
the system monitoring tools that are available on your system.
In the left-hand window here,
I'm running gnome-system-monitor,
which gives me a graphical picture of CPU history on top,
with one line for each CPU on the system.
This is a system with four cores,
each one of which is hyperthreaded so,
it appears as eight CPUs.
In the second line we're seeing memory and swap history.
So, here's the memory usage in this circular graph here and swap here.
Then the third, we're looking at network history,
we're seeing both sending and receiving.
So, in the window on the top right,
I'm going to run top which gives
basic process monitoring on my system and in the bottom window,
I'm going to run vmstat,
with a command of a to show everything and then,
I'm going to run it every two seconds,
a thousand times, just so it doesn't stop.
Then in the lower right here,
I'm going to run a very CPU intensive task,
which is a kernel compile,
which proceeds in parallel on each CPU.
So, it's very CPU intensive.
So, let me do that.
So, that's running now.
Then first of all, you'll quickly see that
the CPU usage is going to pin up at the top here.
It takes a few seconds to cut in but then it's going,
all the CPUs are busy at the top here.
Also, I can see that in the top output
the system is using 80 percent of its CPU time roughly,
on user processes,
that means compiling and the user space,
and about 10 percent during system activity which is
going to be handling system calls for the most part.
If I hit the number one,
I can get a readout for each CPU,
instead of just the sum totals,
which we now see on the top,
you see they're all quite busy.
On the bottom here, we can see all the activity going on with the memory on the system.
In particular, how many pages are active and inactive,
swaps coming in and out,
how much space is free, et cetera.
So, that's just a brief look at a few of the tools that are available on your system.